Starting in the early 19th century, the Market Revolution was an economic boom throughout the whole of the U.S. While it linked some industries in the nation, it ultimately divided the nation due to its different effect on the North and South. During the mid 1800's regional tensions caused by arguments over slavery, opinions on westward expansion, and economical differences all led to the Civil War.

The existence of slavery would be the focus of many disagreements during the pre Civil War period. In the Dred Scott v. Sandford court case, African Americans would not be called citizens under the constitution(Doc 4). However abolitionist leaders such as Frederick Douglas would be at the forefront of the fight for black citizenship and gain prominence for their contributions to the abolition movement(Doc 1). This tension over slavery although fought politically, would also manifest among the common people. In one instance, an African American tailor would refuse his services to a marshal enforcing the fugitive slave law, stating that with him, "Principle first"(Doc 2). This argument over whether slavery should or should not exist can be seen as the main reason for the secession of the South and the start of the Civil War.  

While America was in the midst of exerting its influence over most of the North American continent, opinions would differ on how to settle the new territories. During this period a new method of deciding whether states would be free or state called popular sovereignty would develop. Based on the votes of the people living in the state, it created problems such as "large numbers of illegal votes were cast" by those in neighboring states(Doc 3). Political parties would also debate fiercely over this topic, with leaders such as Lincoln stating that he was "inflexible" on the concept of extending slavery to new territories (Doc 7). The inability to agree on the expansion of the country was another critical point in development of the Civil War.

The striking difference between the Northern and Southern economy would also be an important factor in the separating between the two regions. During the 1800's the North underwent a rapid growth in industry and production with over "two hundred millions of dollars" invested.(Doc 6) On the other hand, the South had few improvements and remained mainly dependent on their plantations worked by slave labor. Dozens of enslaved African-Americans could be seen picking cotton plantations for miles on end(Doc 5). This key difference on the dependence of economy would further cause a chasm between the North and South, eventually inciting the Civil War.

In conclusion the Civil War was caused by a mix of issues over slavery, debates over westward expansion, and differing economies. These factors created differences between the regions and ultimately gave rise to the Civil War.